### Narrative explanation

The second concept from historical social science is narrative explanation, which is closely related to historical thinking. Of course, narrative is central to scenario thinking. \citet[][39]{schwartz1996art} defines scenarios as "stories that give meaning to events". Scenarios usually contain a scenario narrative, understood as the fleshing-out of the scenario variables \citep[e.g.]{Heinonen_2013, schwartz1996art}. Narrative is also a central aspect of causal layered analysis, especially on the myth/metaphor layer where futures are articulated as stories \citep{inayatullah1998causal}. Similarly, \citet{MacDonald_2012} argues that there may be archetypal cultural narratives underlying scenarios.

However, within the futures field, narratives are often considered in the literary sense, as products of creative writing \citep[e.g.]{Burnam_Fink_2014}. Likewise, historians may consider their task as weaving literary narratives, and thus their primary interest is in literary representations of events rather than events as such \citep{staley2007history}.

Narratives are important, but they should be understood within the frame of narrative *explanation*, which is a social scientific attempt to link narrative to causal explanation. This concept brings narrative closer to scientific realism. As \citet{Abell_2004} puts it, "social reality can metaphysically be pictured as an evolutionary network of complex social interactions (i.e., as a narrative)". In a way, social reality *is* a narrative. Narrative explanation can be understood as an alternative to variable-based explanations but without abandoning the notion of causality, although some theorists prefer to speak of *enchainment* rather than causality \citep{Abbott_1992, Abell_2004}. The problem with traditional causal explanations is that variables act rather than actors, and thus stories disappear \citep{Abbott_1992}.

In the narrative explanatory mode, the task of a social scientist is to build an *analytic narrative* or *causal narrative* from a chain of events. Analytic narratives are "theoretically structured stories about coherent sequences of motivated actions" \citep[][458]{Aminzade_1992}. \citet{greycite30256}, in turn, defines a causal narrative as "an orderly analysis of the sequence of events and the causal processes that connected them, leading from a set of initial conditions to the outcome in question". These definitions are very similar, and both forms aim to scientifically explain why certain events took place. Here I will use the term analytic narrative.

The connection between narratives and reactive sequences is that narratives are representations *of* a sequence -- they tell the story of a sequence of events but in a theoretically informed way. Analytic narratives give meaning to sequences by explaining the temporal connections among events \citep{Aminzade_1992}. The difficult question is which are the most important events, the crucial nodes in the sequence. The social world is full of events, and it is often difficult discerning which ones are relevant for the research at hand. Historical institutionalists use the term *critical junctures* to refer to such crucial events \citep{Capoccia_2007}. These are critical choice points which radically alter the direction of a process. To some extent, they could be likened to black swans or wild cards within futures research, but perhaps they need not be as dramatic. In reality, it is usually difficult to identify clear critical junctures, and therefore it may be more suitable to consider criticality of events as a continuum. \citet{mahoney2000path} makes the point that critical events are contingent, that is, they cannot be predicted with existing theory. My hypothesis is that substantive theory of the topic is needed for identifying crucial events.

Mechanism-based explanations make predicting outcomes problematic \citep{Hedstr_m_2010}.
Narrative explanation: chain of linked events leading to a conclusion that is not predictable \citep[][289]{Abell_2004}. This means that 

Singular causality: transformative power of human actions. Narrative explanation only works with human action (Abell)?

Graph: what are the nodes and edges? nodes = conditions, states of the world (events?); edges = enchainment, causal mechanisms (or events?)

In order to construct a plausible narrative explanation, the scenario analyst needs to get acquainted with substantive theories on the topic that is studied, what \citet{piirainen2015theory} refer to as using theory within foresight. The events in the actual historical development of the phenomenon also need to be known.

The goal of narrative explanation or analytic narratives is generalisation of sequence types. History certainly does not repeat itself, but it is plausible that similar types of processes may occur at different times and in different places, if the conditions are sufficiently similar. They may even take the form of "robust processes" that occur in similar ways across a wide spectrum of time and place \citep{Aminzade_1992}. The metaphor of a musical sequence, where a melodic pattern is repeated at different pitches, is apt here.

Scenarios should be explicitly event and sequence-oriented, outlining possible future event sequences, branching points and conjunctures (see Fig. 2).

A sensible solution seems to be that narrative explanations make use of mid-level narratives that are neither lists of single events nor grand global stories. This means for instance studying a particular institution in a geographical area at some point in history. I will create a sketch of this kind of discussion in the section on privacy protection below.