### Reactive sequences

If scenarios are viewed as sequences, what does this mean? A sequence can consist of any kind of elements which somehow link to one another. In the following, I would like to specify the type of sequence that a scenario describes. I will argue that a scenario should be viewed as a narrative of a *reactive sequence*.

The concept of reactive sequences comes from the work of the sociologist James Mahoney. \citet{mahoney2000path} argues that there are two types of sequences that can be analysed using the framework of path dependence: self-reinforcing sequences and reactive sequences. Self-reinforcing sequences are perhaps the better known type, since the classic examples of path dependence, such as the QWERTY keyboard layout, represent this type of sequence. In a self-reinforcing sequence, an initial choice becomes entrenched over time due to increasing returns and other mechanisms of reproduction.

Some scenarios may be presented as self-reinforcing sequences, as kind of "winner takes all" narratives. However, I would argue that the second type of sequence, reactive sequence, is useful for futures research because it concerns over time rather than persistence. \citet[][526]{mahoney2000path} gives the following definition of a reactive sequence:

>  Reactive sequences are chains of temporally ordered and causally connected events. In a reactive sequence, each event in the sequence is both a reaction to antecedent events and a cause of subsequent events.

The definition is simple but it has wide implications. Because early events constrain subsequent ones, their impact cascades throughout the entire sequence. This is similar notion to the notion in evolutionary futures studies that small fluctuations may ultimately have drastic impacts on outcomes \cite{Mannermaa_1991}. However, here the level abstraction is lower and the focus is on specific processes rather than attempting to explain overall societal development.

Another crucial implication is that the order and timing of events play a crucial role. Thus it is not only important to consider what is done (action) and by whom (actor), but also *when* this action is taken.

The strength of futurists is that we are accustomed to thinking in processual terms. In explaining change, we usually consider different types of continuities (trends, megatrends) and discontinuities (weak signals, emerging issues, black swans). The focus on narrative and event sequences represents an attempt to enrich this thinking by breaking trends into their component parts: which events and actions constitute an empirical trend?

In many scenario approaches, scenarios are creatively written stories that open stakeholders' views concerning the future \citep{schwartz1996art}. While scenarios are always stories, the sequences and change processes to which they refer can be viewed in at least moderately realist terms. There are actual transformations happening in society, not only in cognitive representations of society. Nonetheless, realism cannot be conceived naively within futures research, because the shape of the emerging future depends largely on how actors envision it in the present. In recent decades, this realist position has been discussed by several authors, highlighting for instance dispositions, affordances and latent possibilities within structures \cite{bell1997foundations, patomaki2006realist, poli2011steps}.

A scenario is always one part of a historical chain which stretches into the past and the future. Cutting off a discrete scenario from this continuum is always somewhat artificial. An additional difficulty is that events are part of several narratives at the same time, and connecting them into coherent stories involves much interpretation even if a realist perspective is adopted. Contemporary social scientists do not consider that there is a grand narrative such as progress or secularisation that encompasses all events and makes them understandable. Instead, narratives at different time horizons overlap and cross each other in complex ways. As \citet[][438]{Abbott_1992} states, "the full social process, when viewed in narrative terms, makes up a network of stories flowing into the present and future". Historical sociologists use the term *conjuncture* to represent the intersection of separate sequences \citep{mahoney2000path}. This concept is illustrated in Fig. 1, where *S* represents the conjuncture point which joins the two sequences beginning with *A* and *M* into a common sequence.

