The strength of futurists is that we are accustomed to thinking in terms of complex overlapping processes. In explaining change, futurists usually consider different types of continuities (trends, megatrends) and discontinuities (weak signals, emerging issues, black swans). The focus on event sequences is an attempt to enrich this thinking by breaking trends into their component parts. Discovering crucial event sequences may not be feasible in many cases, but it allows us to consider which events and actions constitute an empirically observable trend.

The reactive sequence approach implies at least moderate scientific realism. In many scenario approaches, scenarios are creatively written stories whose purpose is to open stakeholders' views concerning the future \citep{schwartz1996art}. While scenarios are always stories, the sequences and change processes to which they refer can be viewed in at least moderately realist terms. There are actual transformations happening in society, not only in cognitive representations of society. Nonetheless, realism cannot be conceived naively within futures research, because the shape of the emerging future depends largely on how actors envision it in the present. In recent decades, this realist position has been discussed by several authors, highlighting for instance dispositions, affordances and latent possibilities within structures \cite{bell1997foundations, patomaki2006realist, poli2011steps}.

To illustrate this scenario approach, I will use an example from my own area of research, privacy protection.
I am particularly interested in the development of privacy protection instruments, understood as various legal, technological and other instruments to protect a desired level of privacy \citep{bennett2006governance}.
In this area, we can consider the so-called *right to be forgotten* (RTBF) which has been actively discussed especially within Europe in recent years.
This discussion is intended only as an illustration of the concepts, not as a substantial contribution to privacy research.
A sequence is always one part of a historical chain which stretches into the past and the future. Cutting off a discrete
sequence from this continuum is always somewhat artificial.
In the case of RTBF, a logical starting point are two legal documents, the EU Data Protection Directive \citep{eu-directive} and the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights \citep{eu-charter}, because these documents crystallise a long debate about the right to privacy.
Fig. 2 shows a rough outline of the process of RTBF.