## Scenario approaches

Scenarios can be labelled as a standard tool of futures research \cite{bell1997foundations}. While futurists agree on the usefulness of building scenarios in order to anticipate future developments, there is no consensus on what scenarios are and the best techniques for creating them.  Several recent articles have tried to make sense of the domain of scenario approaches by dividing approaches into scenario types \cite{Bishop_2007,Bradfield_2005,B_rjeson_2006,van_Notten_2003}. Such typologies are made based on slightly different criteria. For example, \citet{B_rjeson_2006} focus on purposes and aims, while \citet{Bishop_2007} focus on scenario techniques, and \citet{van_Notten_2003} ambitiously consider project goal, process design and scenario content. \citet{Bradfield_2005}, in turn, focus on three historical schools of scenario development.

In this paper, I will focus on what \citet{van_Notten_2003} call scenario content: the characteristics of the actual output that is produced. Therefore other aspects of scenario building, such as the practical aims of the exercise, the process design and the surroundings, are sidelined. More specifically, I am interested in the philosophical underpinnings of the scenario content. This means the philosophy of science questions that are implied in specific forms of scenario content.

In addition, the focus here is on explaining processes of social change rather than fostering creative thinking about the future. From this perspective, it is beneficial to view the social world in realist rather than constructivist terms. Nonetheless, realism cannot be conceived naively within futures research, because the emerging future is a fundamentally different object of study than present or historical reality. This issue is by no means settled within futures research, but recent conceptual writings suggest that considering dispositions, affordances and latent possibilities within structures is a fruitful perspective \cite{bell1997foundations, poli2011steps}. Briefly, this means that at a particular historical moment there are possibilities for certain events and processes being activated, but what actually takes place depends on human action.

How can these insights be applied to scenario building? Two aspects of scenario content are particularly important:

1. the distinction between snapshot and sequence scenarios and
2. the distinction between external and strategic scenarios.

Considering the first distinction, in this paper scenarios are considered as sequences of events or paths of development rather than end-points. This is by no means the only way of considering scenarios. Scenarios are often conceived as structural descriptions of a future environment, and as such they may be highly useful for planning an organisation's activities \cite{schwartz1996art}. \citet[][77--78]{staley2007history} explicitly states that a "scenario is meant to be synchronic rather than diachronic", describing "the rules of a game, rather than [...] the specific sequence of play". In other words, a scenario is conceived as a thick structural description of a future end-state.

According to \citet{Bishop_2007}, the Global Business Network or Shell method of building scenarios has become dominant and it has somewhat shadowed other scenario techniques. Of course, the success of the GBN technique is partly due to the fact that it is an excellent, insightful technique, but partly it is a path-dependent and self-reinforcing development as new futurists are taught the GBN method or a variation of it and they may never get acquainted with alternative approaches. In my view, it is a richness rather than a hindrance that there are many different scenario approaches. The evolution of scenario building should not lead to one dominant approach but to a diversity of approaches.

In a way, this paper proposes a return to the roots of scenario building, since \citet{kahn1967year} argue that scenarios should consist of sequences of events.